In this module,
we're going to spend
some time trying to
think about how we
regulate financial technology and
actually what is
financial technology before we
can get to the
regulatory frameworks
that are going to make
the most sense in this setting.
I want to start very broadly
and try and understand
the theoretical criticisms
around regulation period,
and then try and understand
the concerns and
the innovations that we've made
with respect to
financial regulation in
particular since
the Great Recession.
I then want us to focus on
exactly what FinTech is,
why it's growing,
how it's growing,
and also how different countries
have approached the regulation of
financial technology
and what lessons
that can teach us in
the future going forward.
The traditional
like Chicago style,
economic view of regulation
has been a suspicious one.
So George Stigler
who famously won
the Nobel Prize for the theory
of Economic Regulation,
made the following observation.
"Regulation may be actively
sought by an industry,
or it may be thrust upon it.
As a rule regulation is
acquired by the industry
and is designed and operated
primarily for its benefit.
At worst, regulation hinders
growth and innovation
through bureaucracy."
This Stiglerion perspective is
a bit about the nature
of regulatory capture.
So because regulation
will be made
by government regulators
even well-intentioned regulators,
those entities with resources
like large financial institutions
who can lobby and
persuade the regulators
that their concerns
are incredibly valid,
can use regulation as a tool
to try and conform regulations
so it is best equipped to
deliver precisely what
the industry requests.
This can mean both
under regulating
financial institutions or in
general under
regulating industry.
But it can also mean
aggressive regulation
in certain settings for
the purpose of keeping incumbents
with significant market power
in these domains,
and making it more difficult
for new competitors to
emerge and comply with
existing regulatory burdens.
Milton Friedman view of
regulation is very similar.
His point made very
vividly is that,
"Corruption is
government intrusion into
market efficiencies in
the form of regulations."
So the view is that
the market functions
well, it functions freely,
and regulation is going
to just come in and muck
up a well-functioning market
and for the purpose
of advantaging certain
industry participants
who are best able to control
the regulatory process.
This view of regulation
is certainly
not shared by all and certainly
not voiced by regulators in
the aftermath of
the financial crisis,
which many view as
the byproduct of
an overly lax regulatory
framework with
respect to large
financial institutions
and financial intermediaries
more broadly.
Christine Lagarde has made
the point that regulation fields
especially necessary in sectors
like the financial sector,
where large scale crises in
this sector like
the Great Recession can expose
entire countries
around the globe to
substantial and significant
catastrophic effects,
if there is in fact a crisis
like the recession.
This is distinct from failures in
a particular industry
which is less
connected than
the banking sector,
and less attached to
every single decision and
every single choice
that consumers
and firms make with respect
to the investments that they
choose for themselves in
the businesses that they operate.
Elizabeth Warren made
this observation
with respect to
the financial crisis that
although in other industries
more conventional
consumer industries
like car industries,
toys, aspirin, meat, toasters,
the analogy that
chooses quite vividly,
nearly every product
sold has passed
basic safety regulations well in
advance of being
marketed and sold.
But consumer credit tends to
be what she calls
a buyer-beware, wild west,
which is especially surprising
given Christine regards
observation that
crises in financial markets
have the potential to create
real systemic consequences
for the globe as a whole.
Interestingly, industry is
also quite understanding of
the need for good and
thoughtful regulation
in financial markets.
Jamie Dimon the CEO of J.P.
Morgan makes the point that,
good regulation should
simultaneously be
conducive to business and
to consumer protection,
allowing businesses
to innovate and
create structures that
will be advantageous
to consumers without
worrying about having to
comply with overly
burdensome regulation,
but simultaneously
protecting consumers
from the risks that
they encountered in
the Great Recession.
George Soros makes
the point that the problem
with the Milton Friedman
conception of markets being
freely operational and
regulation being a means
of corrupt interference in
well-functioning markets,
is that in his conception
markets in fact are imperfect.
So you'd need regulation,
but of course regulators
are also imperfect.
So the regulatory process
requires simultaneous adaption,
both by industry and by
regulators to come to a set of
processes that are going to well
protect consumers
in these markets.